# gpas_local_db

Database to be hosted locally in the hospital, holding GPAS sourced data plus others.

## Installation instructions

To install the Python Client on your local machine download the executable from [https://github.com/oxfordmmm/gpas_local_db/releases](https://github.com/oxfordmmm/gpas_local_db/releases), choosing the executable that matches your platform. Put the executable into a folder on your computer. Also download `RunSampleImport.xlsm` and `env_template` and put them into the same directory as the executable.

Rename the `env_template` file to `.env` and edit using a plain text editor (not MS Word). The contents of the `.env` file should look like the following

```env
DATABASE_USER = ''
DATABASE_PASSWORD = ''
DATABASE_HOST = ''
DATABASE_PORT = '5432'
DATABASE_NAME = ''
```

Your system administrator should be able to give you the values to enter into the `.env` file. Please do not share these values or the file with anyone. Please also do not upload the file to any kind of sharing site.

You will only need to setup the `.env` file when first downloading the file.

The `RunSampleImport.xlsm` is a template file for entering the data into.

### Mac code signing (Mac Only)

Modern Macs require executables to be code signed. The executable you downloaded is currently not code signed, so you will need to tell the system that this is ok. You should only do this if you are happy of the provenance of the executable.

Open a terminal and cd into the directory where you have downloaded the files. You may need to make the file executable using a command similar to the following:

```bash
chmod +x ./gpaslocal-v0.0.15-macOS-arm64
```

You will then need to release the file from quarritine using a command similar to the following:

```bash
xattr -d com.apple.quarantine ./gpaslocal-v0.0.15-macOS-arm64
```

### Entering the data

Use the Excel spreadsheet that you download as a template. When opening the spreadsheet, you will get a warning about macros, please click the enable macros button if you are happy with the provenance of the Excel Workbook. Using Excel enter you data into the four worksheets Runs, Specimens, Samples and Storage.

### Uploading the Excel Spreadsheet

To run the use a command similar to the following for Mac and Linux

```bash
./gpaslocal-v0.0.15-macOS-arm64 upload <spreadsheet_name> --dryrun
```

Replacing the executable name with the one you download (the version number will probably be different), and replace `<spreadsheet_name>` with the name of your spreadsheet.

You may get errors, so if they relate to the data entered, you can fix them in the spreadsheet. Otherwise contact you system admninistrator for advice.

Keep running with the `--dryrun` flag until you get no errors. You can then remove the `--dryrun` flag to apply the data to the database. Before you remove the `--dryrun` flag make sure that you are happy with the changes the program is going to make by reviewing the log messages.

### Uploading GPAS summary.csv

To add the GPAS system summary data including speciation, you will need the `summary.csv` extracted from the GPAS system and the `mapping.csv` generated by the GPAS client CLI program when you uploaded the batch of samples. Please only download the `summary.csv` for one batch at a time, as the system only takes one `mapping.csv`. You will need to make sure that the samples in the `summary.csv` have already been loaded into the Local Hospital database using the Excel Workbook.

To upload the `summary.csv` use the following command

```bash
./gpaslocal-v0.0.15-macOS-arm64 summary <summary.csv> <mapping.csv> --dryrun
```

Replacing `gpaslocal-v0.0.15-macOS-arm64` with the name of your execuatable, `<summary.csv>` with the name and location of you `summary.csv` and `<mapping.csv>` with the name and location of your mapping.csv. The`--dryrun` flag means that the data will not be applied to the database. If you get no errors then you can remove the `--dryrun` flag to apply the data to the database.

## Running in development mode

Clone the repo to your local machine. You will need to setup the `.env` file as detailed above. You will need to create a blank database and a database user that has permissions to that database. Put this information in the `.env` file. To make changes to the Python program or the structure of the database, make sure that you are running inside a virtual environment and use the following command to setup the Python program.

```bash
pip install .[dev]
```

### Updating the database

We use Alembic to handle the changes to the database (migrations), this is only available when running in Development mode. Use the following command to update the attached database to the latest version.

```bash
alembic upgrade head
```

If you have made changes to the database models, you will need to generate a new migration using the following command.

```bash
alembic revision --autogenerate -m "message"
```

Replacing the message with something suitable. It is important to check the migration that is generated, to make sure it is sensible. Migrations are stored in the `migrations/versions` folder.

Please note when running migrations the `__dbrevision__` variable in `src\gpaslocal\__init__.py` will be updated to the
new head revision. Please remember to commit this file in addition to your bd migration files.
